Readme.md, before:

Usuba
===

Usuba is a programming language to write bitsliced code. It compiles
optimized to C code (+ intrinsics).

---

## Presentation

Go to our [website](https://usubalang.github.io/usuba/) to find more about Usuba.

In particular, the following blog articles are a good introduction:

  - [Usuba - The Genesis](https://usubalang.github.io/usuba/2020/01/07/usuba-genesis.html) explains the motivation behind Usuba.

  - [Bitslicing](https://usubalang.github.io/usuba/2020/01/14/bitslicing.html) presents the bitslicing technique, which is the basis of Usuba.


To go into more details, read our published papers about Usuba:

  * Darius Mercadier, Pierre-Evariste Dagand. [Usuba: High-Throughput and Constant-Time Ciphers, by Construction](https://dariusmercadier.com/assets/documents/usuba-pldi19.pdf), PLDI 2019.

  * Darius Mercadier, Pierre-Évariste Dagand, Lionel Lacassagne, Gilles Muller, [Usuba, Optimizing & Trustworthy Bitslicing Compiler](https://dariusmercadier.com/assets/documents/usuba-wpmvp18.pdf), WPMVP 2018.


Finally, some additional resources that could be useful:

  * Timeless: [One-page presentation of Usuba](https://dariusmercadier.com/assets/documents/overview-usuba.pdf)

  * June 2019: [Technical presentation of Usuba @PLDI'19](https://dariusmercadier.com/assets/documents/slides-pldi-jun19.pdf)

  * February 2019: [High-level presentation of Usuba @Inria's Junior Seminar](https://dariusmercadier.com/assets/documents/inria-junior-seminar-feb19.pdf)



## Installation

Usuba is written in OCaml. On a Debian system, you should be able to
setup the base environment with

    ./install_deps.sh

You can then compile Usuba with:

    ./configure.pl
    make


## A few examples

A few examples of Usuba codes:
 * [bitslice DES](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/usuba/des.ua) (and the generated [C code](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/C/des.c)),
 * [bitslice AES](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/usuba/aes.ua) (and the generated [C code](samples/C/aes.c)),
 * [n-slice AES](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/usuba/aes_kasper.ua) (and the generated [C code](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/C/aes_kasper.c)),
 * [32-slice Serpent](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/usuba/serpent.ua) (and the generated [C code](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/C/serpent.c)),
 * [32-slice Chacha20](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/usuba/chacha20.ua) (and the
   generated [C code](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/C/chacha20.c)).


If you are familiar with Perl, an easy way to see the compiler an
action is to look at the scripts in the
directory [checks/correctness](checks/correctness) that compile a few
Usuba codes, run them and make sure they produce the expected results.


## Compiling

To compile an Usuba file (`.ua`), you need to invoke `./usubac
<options> <source.ua>` (the Usuba source file must be the last argument).
I strongly recommand always using the flag `-no-sched` when doing pure
bitslicing (it disables a few experimental options, and reduces the
amount of code loaded). The option `-no-arr-entry` might also be
usefull for small functions (combined with `-no-arr`).
The list of flags can be obtained by running `./usubac -help`.

For instance, to compile a bitslice AES:

    ./usubac -B -o aes.c -no-sched samples/usuba/aes.c

The C code generated by Usuba uses macros to achieve genericity. This
macros are loaded with the instruction `#include "XXX.h"` at the
begining of the C files generated, where `XXX` is one of `STD`, `SSE`,
`AVX` (which should be `AVX2`), `AVX512`, `Neon`, `AltiVec`. Those
headers are located in the directory [arch](arch).

Commit message:

Fixed compilation and instructions for debian, arch, and docker

Readme.md, after:

Usuba
===

Usuba is a programming language to write bitsliced code. It compiles
optimized to C code (+ intrinsics).

---

## Presentation

Go to our [website](https://usubalang.github.io/usuba/) to find more about Usuba.

In particular, the following blog articles are a good introduction:

  - [Usuba - The Genesis](https://usubalang.github.io/usuba/2020/01/07/usuba-genesis.html) explains the motivation behind Usuba.

  - [Bitslicing](https://usubalang.github.io/usuba/2020/01/14/bitslicing.html) presents the bitslicing technique, which is the basis of Usuba.


To go into more details, read our published papers about Usuba:

  * Darius Mercadier, Pierre-Evariste Dagand. [Usuba: High-Throughput and Constant-Time Ciphers, by Construction](https://dariusmercadier.com/assets/documents/usuba-pldi19.pdf), PLDI 2019.

  * Darius Mercadier, Pierre-Évariste Dagand, Lionel Lacassagne, Gilles Muller, [Usuba, Optimizing & Trustworthy Bitslicing Compiler](https://dariusmercadier.com/assets/documents/usuba-wpmvp18.pdf), WPMVP 2018.


Finally, some additional resources that could be useful:

  * Timeless: [One-page presentation of Usuba](https://dariusmercadier.com/assets/documents/overview-usuba.pdf)

  * June 2019: [Technical presentation of Usuba @PLDI'19](https://dariusmercadier.com/assets/documents/slides-pldi-jun19.pdf)

  * February 2019: [High-level presentation of Usuba @Inria's Junior Seminar](https://dariusmercadier.com/assets/documents/inria-junior-seminar-feb19.pdf)



## Installation

Usuba is written in OCaml. 

On a Debian system, you should be able to
setup the base environment with

    ./install_deps_debian.sh


On an Arch system, setup with

    ./install_deps_arch.sh

You can then compile Usuba with:

    make

To setup and compile Usuba using a Docker container:

    cd docker && docker build -t usuba . && docker run -it usuba
    


## A few examples

A few examples of Usuba codes:
 * [bitslice DES](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/usuba/des.ua) (and the generated [C code](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/C/des.c)),
 * [bitslice AES](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/usuba/aes.ua) (and the generated [C code](samples/C/aes.c)),
 * [n-slice AES](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/usuba/aes_kasper.ua) (and the generated [C code](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/C/aes_kasper.c)),
 * [32-slice Serpent](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/usuba/serpent.ua) (and the generated [C code](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/C/serpent.c)),
 * [32-slice Chacha20](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/usuba/chacha20.ua) (and the
   generated [C code](https://github.com/usubalang/examples/samples/C/chacha20.c)).


If you are familiar with Perl, an easy way to see the compiler an
action is to look at the scripts in the
directory [checks/correctness](checks/correctness) that compile a few
Usuba codes, run them and make sure they produce the expected results.


## Compiling

To compile an Usuba file (`.ua`), you need to invoke `./usubac
<options> <source.ua>` (the Usuba source file must be the last argument).
I strongly recommand always using the flag `-no-sched` when doing pure
bitslicing (it disables a few experimental options, and reduces the
amount of code loaded). The option `-no-arr-entry` might also be
usefull for small functions (combined with `-no-arr`).
The list of flags can be obtained by running `./usubac -help`.

For instance, to compile a bitslice ACE:

    ./usubac -B -o ace.c -no-sched examples/samples/usuba/ace.ua

The C code generated by Usuba uses macros to achieve genericity. This
macros are loaded with the instruction `#include "XXX.h"` at the
begining of the C files generated, where `XXX` is one of `STD`, `SSE`,
`AVX` (which should be `AVX2`), `AVX512`, `Neon`, `AltiVec`. Those
headers are located in the directory [arch](arch).
