experimentations/add/Readme.md, before:

Bitslice addition benchmark
---

**TD;DR: bitslice is between 2 and 5 times slower than packed addition.**

This small experiment compares a bitslice addition to a packed
addition on SSE registers. The bitslice addition is implemented an
adder circuit.

Run the experiment with `./run.pl`.

On my Intel Skylake i5-6500, with Clang 7.0.0, the results are:

|    **addition type**   |  **cycles/loop (AVX / SSE / GP)** |  **cycles/add  (AVX / SSE / GP)** |
| ---------------------- | --------------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
|  8-bit        bitslice |    12.19   /   14.78  /  16.30   |     0.05   /    0.12  /   0.51   | 
|  8-bit   packed_single |     1.01   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.03   /    0.06  /   1.00   | 
|  8-bit packed_parallel |     1.00   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.01   /    0.02  /   0.33   | 
|         &nbsp;         |             &nbsp;               |                &nbsp;            |
| 16-bit        bitslice |    30.93   /   33.34  /  34.60   |     0.12   /    0.26  /   1.08   | 
| 16-bit   packed_single |     1.00   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.06   /    0.13  /   1.00   | 
| 16-bit packed_parallel |     1.00   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.02   /    0.04  /   0.33   | 
|         &nbsp;         |             &nbsp;               |                &nbsp;             |
| 32-bit        bitslice |    76.17   /   74.78  /  74.93   |     0.30   /    0.58  /   2.34   | 
| 32-bit   packed_single |     1.00   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.13   /    0.25  /   1.00   | 
| 32-bit packed_parallel |     1.00   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.04   /    0.08  /   0.33   | 


|    **addition type**   |  **cycles/loop (SSE / GP)** |  **cycles/add  (SSE / GP)** |
| ---------------------- | --------------------------- | --------------------------- |
|  8-bit        bitslice |     12.03    /    16.26     |      0.09    /     0.51     | 
|  8-bit   packed_single |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.06    /     1.00     | 
|  8-bit packed_parallel |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.02    /     0.33     | 
|         &nbsp;         |          &nbsp;             |             &nbsp;          |
| 16-bit        bitslice |     28.84    /    34.56     |      0.23    /     1.08     | 
| 16-bit   packed_single |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.13    /     1.00     | 
| 16-bit packed_parallel |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.04    /     0.33     | 
|         &nbsp;         |          &nbsp;             |             &nbsp;          |
| 32-bit        bitslice |     69.32    /    74.83     |      0.54    /     2.34     | 
| 32-bit   packed_single |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.25    /     1.00     | 
| 32-bit packed_parallel |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.08    /     0.33     |


Where `bitslice` is the sofware implemented carry-ripple adder,
`packed_single` is native SSE packed addition, and `packed_parallel`
is an improvement of `packed_single` where 3 additions can be done in
parallel. Each version does some number of additions in parallel _per
addition_: the packed_single and packed_parallel versions do 4/8/16
additions in parallel, and the bitslice version always does 128
additions in parallel. The cycles/add are therefore simply the
cycles/loop divided by the number of parallel additions.


## Results

### Overall

Implementing an adder in software (carry-ripple adder to be precise)
is twice slower than using packed SIMD addition instructions when the
latter can be parallelized, and 5 times slower when the SIMD additions
can be parallelized.

For each experiment (packed, packed parallel, and bitsliced), a small
discussion follows, explaining why I beleive the results to be
(mostly) correct.

### packed addition

`packed_single` does a single addition in a loop, with a dependency
between each iteration. The loop therefore contains 3 instructions: an
SSE add, an increment, and a conditional jump. This 3 instructions
should be doable in a single cycle, and this is what we observe.

### parallel packed addition

The `packed_parallel` version does 3 independent addition per loop,
and therefore has a maximum theoretical throughput of 0.33. This is
what we get; as expected. Can't get any better.

**Fun fact**: at some point I force some unrolling by Clang (I don't
remember why but my performances were not as expected, and I thought
more unrolling would help). Turns out it harms performances. TODO: add
more explanations.


### bitslice addition

For an addition _n_-bits, the bitslice adder contains _n_ adders, each
of them doing 5 bitwise operations. Since about 3 operations can be
done every cycles, the expected performances are _n * 5/3_ cycles for
each _n_-bit addition. We get the following numbers experimentally:

 - 8-bit, expected: 8 * 5/3 = 13.3; got: 15.02
 
 - 16-bit, expected: 16 * 5/3 = 26.5; got: 33.34
 
 - 32-bit, expected: 32 * 5/3 = 53.3; got: 74.64
 
For the 8-bit adder, it's fairly close to what we expect. A slight
overhead comming from a bit of spilling and maybe some dependencies
between the full adders.

The 16 and 32-bit adders are respectively about 17% and 23% slower
than expected. I am fairly confident that this comes from the
spilling: about half of their assembly instructions are `move`.



## TODO

 - run `perf`
 
 - run `vtune`

 - run `iaca` or `llvm-mca`

Commit message:

[add expe] add all adders comparison

experimentations/add/Readme.md, after:

Bitslice addition benchmark
---

**TD;DR: bitslice is between 2 and 5 times slower than packed addition.**

This small experiment compares a bitslice addition to a packed
addition on SSE registers. The bitslice addition is implemented an
adder circuit.

Run the experiment with `./run.pl`.

On my Intel Skylake i5-6500, with Clang 7.0.0, the results are:

|    **addition type**   |  **cycles/loop (AVX / SSE / GP)** |  **cycles/add  (AVX / SSE / GP)** |
| ---------------------- | --------------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
|  8-bit        bitslice |    12.19   /   14.78  /  16.30   |     0.05   /    0.12  /   0.51   | 
|  8-bit   packed_single |     1.01   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.03   /    0.06  /   1.00   | 
|  8-bit packed_parallel |     1.00   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.01   /    0.02  /   0.33   | 
|         &nbsp;         |             &nbsp;               |                &nbsp;            |
| 16-bit        bitslice |    30.93   /   33.34  /  34.60   |     0.12   /    0.26  /   1.08   | 
| 16-bit   packed_single |     1.00   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.06   /    0.13  /   1.00   | 
| 16-bit packed_parallel |     1.00   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.02   /    0.04  /   0.33   | 
|         &nbsp;         |             &nbsp;               |                &nbsp;             |
| 32-bit        bitslice |    76.17   /   74.78  /  74.93   |     0.30   /    0.58  /   2.34   | 
| 32-bit   packed_single |     1.00   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.13   /    0.25  /   1.00   | 
| 32-bit packed_parallel |     1.00   /    1.00  /   1.00   |     0.04   /    0.08  /   0.33   | 


|    **addition type**   |  **cycles/loop (SSE / GP)** |  **cycles/add  (SSE / GP)** |
| ---------------------- | --------------------------- | --------------------------- |
|  8-bit        bitslice |     12.03    /    16.26     |      0.09    /     0.51     | 
|  8-bit   packed_single |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.06    /     1.00     | 
|  8-bit packed_parallel |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.02    /     0.33     | 
|         &nbsp;         |          &nbsp;             |             &nbsp;          |
| 16-bit        bitslice |     28.84    /    34.56     |      0.23    /     1.08     | 
| 16-bit   packed_single |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.13    /     1.00     | 
| 16-bit packed_parallel |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.04    /     0.33     | 
|         &nbsp;         |          &nbsp;             |             &nbsp;          |
| 32-bit        bitslice |     69.32    /    74.83     |      0.54    /     2.34     | 
| 32-bit   packed_single |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.25    /     1.00     | 
| 32-bit packed_parallel |      1.00    /     1.00     |      0.08    /     0.33     |


Where `bitslice` is the sofware implemented carry-ripple adder,
`packed_single` is native SSE packed addition, and `packed_parallel`
is an improvement of `packed_single` where 3 additions can be done in
parallel. Each version does some number of additions in parallel _per
addition_: the packed_single and packed_parallel versions do 4/8/16
additions in parallel, and the bitslice version always does 128
additions in parallel. The cycles/add are therefore simply the
cycles/loop divided by the number of parallel additions.


## Results

### Overall

Implementing an adder in software (carry-ripple adder to be precise)
is twice slower than using packed SIMD addition instructions when the
latter can be parallelized, and 5 times slower when the SIMD additions
can be parallelized.

For each experiment (packed, packed parallel, and bitsliced), a small
discussion follows, explaining why I beleive the results to be
(mostly) correct.

### packed addition

`packed_single` does a single addition in a loop, with a dependency
between each iteration. The loop therefore contains 3 instructions: an
SSE add, an increment, and a conditional jump. This 3 instructions
should be doable in a single cycle, and this is what we observe.

### parallel packed addition

The `packed_parallel` version does 3 independent addition per loop,
and therefore has a maximum theoretical throughput of 0.33. This is
what we get; as expected. Can't get any better.

**Fun fact**: at some point I force some unrolling by Clang (I don't
remember why but my performances were not as expected, and I thought
more unrolling would help). Turns out it harms performances. TODO: add
more explanations.


### bitslice addition

For an addition _n_-bits, the bitslice adder contains _n_ adders, each
of them doing 5 bitwise operations. Since about 3 operations can be
done every cycles, the expected performances are _n * 5/3_ cycles for
each _n_-bit addition. We get the following numbers experimentally:

 - 8-bit, expected: 8 * 5/3 = 13.3; got: 15.02
 
 - 16-bit, expected: 16 * 5/3 = 26.5; got: 33.34
 
 - 32-bit, expected: 32 * 5/3 = 53.3; got: 74.64
 
For the 8-bit adder, it's fairly close to what we expect. A slight
overhead comming from a bit of spilling and maybe some dependencies
between the full adders.

The 16 and 32-bit adders are respectively about 17% and 23% slower
than expected. I am fairly confident that this comes from the
spilling: about half of their assembly instructions are `move`.


## Comparing adders by size


The script `benchmark_adders.pl` generates adders of size 4 to 64 and
benchmarks them on GP, SSE and AVX. The results can be found in the
following
[spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/17BLaOdQEMvRXepwmvCuXoKrb4Nwoxn8aoEfNqwo1YZY/edit?usp=sharing).
