---
layout: post
title: Automatic masking against side-channel attacks
date: "2020-06-27 00:00:00"
description: CPU leak information through timings, caches accesses, power consumption, electromagnetic radiations or other compromising emanations. One very powerful way to recover this leaked information is through the Simple Power Analysis (SPA) and the more powerful Differential Power Analysis (DPA) attacks, which work by analyzing power or EM traces from a cipher's execution to recover the key and plaintext.
lang: en
locale: en_US
author: Darius Mercadier
excerpt: 
comments: false
hidden: true
---

<!-- intro -->

CPU leak information through timings [49], caches accesses [52,53,54],
power consumption [48,49,42], electromagnetic radiations [45,46,47] or
other _compromising emanations_ [50,51]. One very powerful way to
recover this leaked information is to design a Simple Power Analysis
(SPA) or a more powerful Differential Power Analysis (DPA) attack [23],
which work by analyzing power or EM traces from a cipher's execution
to recover the key and plaintext.

Several approaches to mitigate SPA and DPA have been proposed. For
instance, inserting dummy instructions, working with both data and
their complements or using hardware modules to randomize power
consumption [40], designing hardware gates whose power consumption is
independent of their inputs [32,41] or other hardware randomization
modules [75]. The most popular countermeasures against SPA and DPA are
however based on _secret sharing_ [24,25], since they offer provable
security.


<!-- Masking -->
### Masking

The first masking schemes were proposed by Chari _et al._ [38] and
Goubin and Patarin [39]. The principle of masking is to split each
intermediate value _b_ of a cipher into _k_ random values _r1 ... rk_
(called _shares_) such that `b = r1 ∗ r2 ∗ ... ∗ rk` for some group
operation `∗`. The most commonly used operation is the exclusive or
(resulting in a _boolean masking_ scheme), but modular addition or
modular multiplication can also be used (resulting in an _arithmetic
masking_ scheme) [28,26]. 

The number of shares (_k_) is called the _masking order_. Early masked
implementations were only using two shares [28,26,37,27], which is
sufficient to protect against first-order DPA. However, _higher order
DPA_ (HO-DPA) can be designed by combining multiple sources of leakage
to reconstruct the secrets, and can break first-order masked
implementations [23,42,55,56]. When the masking order is greater than
one, the term _higher-order_ masking is used [29,63,65,66,67,68].

The _probing-model_ is widely used to analyze the security of masked
software implementations against side-channel attacks. This model was
introduced by Ishai, Sahai and Wagner in [29] to construct circuits
resistant to hardware probing attacks. It was latter shown that this
model and the underlying construction were instrumental to the design
of efficient praxctically-secure maskedcryptographic implementations
[63, 46, 42]. A masking scheme secure against a _t_-probing adversary,
_i.e._ who can probe _t_ arbitrary variables in the computation, is
indeed secure by design against the class of side-channel attacks of
order _t_ [91].

Most masking schemes consider the implementation to be protected as a
Boolean or arithmetic circuit composed of gates of different
natures. These gates are then replaced bygadgets processing masked
variables. One of the important contributions of [29] was to propose a
multiplication gadget secure against _t_-probing attacks for any _t_,
based on a Boolean masking of order _n = 2t+1_. This was reduced to
the tight order _n = t+1_ in [66] by constraining the two input
sharings to be independent, which could be ensured by the application
of a mask-refreshing gadget when necessary. The design of secure
refresh gadgets and, more generally, the secure composition of gadgets
were subsequently subject to many works [64, 65, 70]. Of particular
interest, the notions of Non-Interference (NI) and Strong
Non-Interference (SNI) introduced in [87] provide a practical
framework for the secure composition of gadgets which yields tight
probing-secure masked implementations. In a nutshell, such
implementations are composed of ISW multiplication and refresh gadgets
(from the names oftheir inventors Ishai, Sahai, and Wagner [48])
achieving the SNI property, and of sharewise addition gadgets. The
main technical challenge in such a context is to identify the number
of required refresh gadgets and their (optimal) placing in the
implementation to obtain a provablet-probing security.


<!-- ### Theory -->


<!-- Designing secure masking schemes is out of the scope of -->
<!-- Usuba. Automating the implementation of existing masking schemes is -->
<!-- however a task suited to Usubac. Before discussing how this is done in -->
<!-- Usuba, we give some bases of the models used to design masking -->
<!-- schemes, on which we rely to automatically generate countermeasures -->
<!-- within Usubac. -->


<!-- One of the line of research to generate DPA-secure implementations was -->
<!-- pioneered by Mical and Reyzin [58], who put forward the assumption -->
<!-- that _only computation leaks information_. Crescenzo _et al._ [59] -->
<!-- extended Mical and Reyzin's work to produce the _bounded retrieval -->
<!-- model_, which supposes an upper bound on the amount of data retrieved -->
<!-- by an attacker, thus refining Maurer's _bounded storage model_ [60] -->
<!-- that supposed an upper bound on the storage capacity of an -->
<!-- attacker. Dziembowski and Pietrzak [61] further refined Crescenzo _et -->
<!-- al._'s model to bound the amount of leakage per round. In 2013, Prouff -->
<!-- and Rivain [57] proposed the _noisy leakage model_, which states that -->
<!-- an observation of a value _x_ only implies a bounded bias in the -->
<!-- probability distribution of _x_, rather than revealing _x_ -->
<!-- altogether. While the noisy leakage model is one of the most realistic -->
<!-- model, it is not the most convenient one to build security proofs -->
<!-- [72]. -->

<!-- Another leakage model is the widely used _t-probing model_, introduced -->
<!-- by Ishai _et al._ [29]. In this model, an attacker is able to place _d_ -->
<!-- needles on _d_ wires, and thus gains access to _d_ intermediate values -->
<!-- of a cipher, allowing him to construct a _d_-th order DPA. Duc _et -->
<!-- al._ [62] showed a reduction of the noisy leakage model to the probing -->
<!-- model of Ishai _et al._ [29]: security in the probing model implies -->
<!-- security in the noisy leakage model. -->

<!-- Another contribution of Ishai _et al._ [29] is a masking scheme to -->
<!-- secure any circuit against a _d_<sup>th</sup>-order DPA. They proved -->
<!-- that their masking scheme with _d_ shares offer security against a -->
<!-- _d/2_<sup>th</sup>-order DPA in the _t_-probing model. Rivain and -->
<!-- Prouff [63] and Coron _et al._ [64] later showed how to adapt Ishai -->
<!-- _et al._'s scheme to provide security against _d-1_<sup>th</sup>-order -->
<!-- DPA with _d_ shares. This result is of importance because the -->
<!-- performance of a masked cipher degrades significanly as the masking -->
<!-- order increases. -->

<!--
Chari _et al._ [38] proposed a secret sharing scheme based on spliting
all intermediate values of a cipher, where each bit _b_ is encoded as
_k_ random shares such that `b = r1 ^ r2 ^ ... ^ rk`. The algorithm
must then be modified so that at no point it requires the original
value of _b_. An attacker having access to _n < k_ shares thus does
not have access to the secret bit _b_. Goubin and Patarin [39]
proposed a similar countermeasure under the name of _duplication
method_.

Inspired by Chari _et al._ [38] and Goubin and Patarin [39],
Messergers [28] applied two secret sharing schemes on the finalists of
the AES competition: _boolean masking_ and _arithmetic masking_. They
both consists in representing each bit with 2 bits: a random bit _r_
and a bit _x'_ such that _x' = x ^ r_ (boolean masking) or <code>_x' =
(x-r) mod 2<sup>32</sup></code>. Akkar and Giraud [26] applied similar
masking schemes to DES (boolean masking) and AES (arithmetic masking
in _GF(2<sup>8</sup>)_). Akkar and Giraud's scheme for AES was later
found vulnerable to some DPA attacks [36,37] (when some inputs are
zero, the masks were inefficient), but Golic and Tymen [37] overcame
this issue. Blömer _et al._ [27] then formally proved that all
intermediate results produced by this scheme are randomized (Golic and
Tymen's argument was only experimental). Doing this, they introduce
the notion of _perfect masking_: a masked algorithm is perfectly
masked at order _d_ if the distribution of any _d_ intermediate
results is statistically independent of any secret input.
-->

<!--
Hardware offers more possibilities to design countermeasures against
masking. Tiri _et al._ [32] for instance proposed custom gates with
power consumption independent of their inputs. Popp and Mangard [41]
proposes a similar mechanism but easier to implement since it operates
at a higher level, thus requiring less custom hardware. Similarly,
trichina _et al._ [31] instead used 1-order masking schemes inspired by
[38] and [39], which are easier to implement than [32]. Similarly,
Ishai _et al._ [29] instead propopsed a masking scheme for any given
order, which they proved to be secure. Similarly, Oswald _et al._ [30]
used similar masking technique as Blömer _et al._ [27], but optimized
it by performing AES's S-box as an inversion in GF(4) rather than
GF(16). Nikova _et al._ [33,34] proposed a way to reduce the amount of
random bits required at the expanse of memory, since their scheme uses
more than two shares to achieve provable security against first order
DPA.
-->

<!-- security / models --> 
<!--
Most of the implementations of the masking schemes discussed so far
have been shown to be vulnerable _higher order DPA_ (HO-DPA)
[23,42,55,56], where an attacker combines multiple sources of leakage
to reconstruct the secrets. This called for higher order masking
(_i.e._ masking with more than more than one share)
[29,63,65,66,67,68]. In fact, some schemes were even vulnerable to
first-order DPA [36,37], which called for provably secure
implementations.
-->



<!-- Automatic generation -->
### Automatic software countermeasures


Bayrak _et al._ [74] designed one of the first automated
tool to automatically protect cryptographic code at software
level. Their approach is experimental: they determine sensitive
operations in a program by running it while recording power
traces. The operations that are found to leak information are then
protected using _random precharging_ [73], which consists in adding
random instructions before and after leaking instructions in order to
increase the noise.

Agosta _et al._ [78] developed a tool to automatically protect
ciphers against DPA using _code morphing_, which consists in
dynamically (at runtime) and randomly generate the code to be
executed. To do so, the cipher is broken into fragments of a few
instructions. For each fragment, several alternative (but semantically
equivalent) sequences of instructions are generated at compile
time. At runtime, a _polymorphic engine_ select for each time one of
the fragments it contains. The resulting code can leak secret data,
but an attacker would not know where in the original cipher the leak
is, since the code executing is dynamically randomized.

Moss _et al._ [76] proposed the first compiler to automate
first-order Boolean masking. Based on CAO's type system [77], the
developers annotates the inputs of the program with `secret` or
`public`, and the compiler infers for each computation whether the
result is `secret` (one of its operand is secret) or `public` (all
operands are `public`). The compiler then searches for operations on
`secret` values that break the masking (for instance a `xor` where the
masks of the operands would cancel out), and fixes them by changing
the masks of its operands.

Agosta _et al._ [89] designed a dataflow analysis to a automatically
mask ciphers at higher orders. Their analysis tracks the secret
dependencies (plaintext or key) of each intermediate variable, and is
thus able to detect intermediate results that would leak secret
information and require to be masked. They implemented their algorithm
in LLVM [80], allowing them to mask ciphers written in C (although
they require some annotations in the C code to spot the plaintext and
key).

Sleuth [79] is a tool to automatically verify whether an implementation
leaks information that is statistically dependent on any secret input,
and would thus be vulnerable to SCA. Sleuth reduces this verification
to a Boolean satisfiability problem, and uses a SAT solver (in
practice, KLEE [81]) to solve it. In practice, Sleuth is implemented
as a pass in LLVM's backend, and is thus also able to ensure that
the compiler (LLVM) does not break masking by reordering instructions.

Eldib _et al._ [82] developed a tool similar to Sleuth called SC
Sniffer. However, whereas Sleuth verifies that all leakage is
statistically independent on any input, SC Sniffer ensures that a
cipher is _perfectly masked_, which is a stronger property: a masked
algorithm is perfectly masked at order _d_ if the distribution of any
_d_ intermediate results is statistically independent of any secret
input [27]. SC Sniffer is also implemented as an LLVM pass and relies
on the Yices SMT solver [84] to conduct its analysis. Eldib and Wang
[83] then built MC Masker, to perform synthesis of masking
countermeasures (SC Sniffer only performs analysis). MC Masker
generates the masked program using _inductive synthesis_: it
iteratively adds countermeasures until the SMT solver is able to prove
that the program is perfectly masked.

G. Barthe _et al._ [85] propose to verify masking using program
equivalence. More specifically, their tool (later dubbed _maskverif_),
inspired by [86], tries to construct a bijection between the
distribution intermediate values of the masked program of interest and
a distribution that is independent from the secret inputs. Maskverif
scales better than previous work (_eg._ MC Masker) at higher masking
order than, even though it does not seem to be able to handle a full
second-order masked AES. Furthermore, Maskverif works is not limited
to analyze 1-bit variables, unlike Sleuth and SCSniffer.

G. Barthe _et al._ [87] later introduced the notion of _strong
non-interference_. Intuitively, a strongly _t_-non-interfering code is
_t_-probing secure (or _t-non-interfering_) _and_ composable with any
other strongly _t_-non-interfering code. This is a stronger property
than _t_-probing security, since combining _t_-probing secure gadgets
does not always produce a _t_-probing secure code [64]. They developed
a tool (later dubbed _maskComp_) to generate masked C implementations
from unmasked ones. Unlike previous work which could only verify the
security of an implementation at a given order, maskComp is able to
prove the security of an implementation at any order.

Coron [88] designed a tool called _CheckMasks_ to automatically verify
the security of higher-order masked implementations, similarly to
_maskverif_ [85]. For large implementations, CheckMasks can only
verify the security at small orders. However, CheckMasks is also able
to verify the _t_-SNI (or _t_-NI) property of gadgets at any order.

Belaïd _et al._ [72] developed a tool named _tightPROVE_, which is
able to verify the _t_-probing security of a masked implementation at
any order _t_. TightPROVE improves on maskComp by proposing a method
which is tight in the sense that it is able to minimize the number of
refreshes needed to make an implementation _t_-probing secure.

tightPROVE verifies the _t_-probing security of programs in the _bit
probing model_, meaning that each measures only retrieves a single
bit. It is thus limited to verify the security of programs
manipulating 1-bit variables. Belaïd _et al._ [90] then proposed
tightPROVE<sup>+</sup>, an extension of tightPROVE to the _register
probing model_ where variables represents _l_-bit registers, all of
which leak together. Futhermore, tightPROVE<sup>+</sup> automatically
insert refreshes when needed, whereas tightPROVE was only able to
detect that _some_ refreshes were missing. We integrated
tightPROVE<sup>+</sup> in Usuba [90] (and called the result _Tornado_)
to generate provably _t_-probing secure masked implementations in
either the bit-probing or the register-probing model. In the following
post, we will describe how the integration of tightPROVE<sup>+</sup>
in Usubac was done.


---
## References

[23] P. Kocher _et al._, [Differential Power Analysis](https://www.paulkocher.com/DifferentialPowerAnalysis.pdf), CRYPTO, 1999.

[24] G. R. Blakley, [Safeguarding cryptographic keys](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/32d2/1ccc21a807627fcb21ea829d1acdab23be12.pdf), 1979.

[25] A. Shamir, [How to Share a Secret](https://cs.jhu.edu/~sdoshi/crypto/papers/shamirturing.pdf), 1979.

[26] M. L. Akkar, C. Giraud, [An Implementation of DES and AES, Secure against Some Attacks](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-44709-1_26.pdf), CHES, 2001.

[27] J. Blömer _et al._, [Provably Secure Masking of AES](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-30564-4_5.pdf), SAC, 2004.

[28] T. S. Messerges, [Securing the AES finalists against power analysis attacks](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F3-540-44706-7_11.pdf), FSE, 2000.

[29] Y. Ishai _et al._, [Private Circuits: Securing Hardware against Probing Attacks](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~daw/papers/privcirc-crypto03.pdf), CRYPTO, 2003.

[30] E. Oswald _et al._, [A side-channel analysis resistant description of the AES S-box](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%252F11502760_28.pdf), FSE, 2005.

[31] E. Trichina _et al._, [Small size, low power, side channel-immune AES coprocessor: Design and synthesis results](https://eprint.iacr.org/2003/236.pdf), 2004

[32] K. Tiri _et al._, [A dynamic and differential CMOS logic with signal independent power consumption to withstand differential power analysis on smart cards](https://www.esat.kuleuven.be/cosic/publications/article-705.pdf), 2002.

[33] S. Nikova _et al._, [Secure hardware implementation of non-linear functions in the presence of glitches](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00145-010-9085-7.pdf), J. Cryptology, 2011.

[34] S. Nikova _et al._, [Threshold implementations against side-channel attacks and glitches](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/11935308_38.pdf), ICICS, 2006.

[36] E. Trichina _et al._, [Simplified Adaptive Multiplicative Masking for AES](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-36400-5_15.pdf), CHES, 2002.

[37] J. D. Golic, C. Tymen, [Multiplicative Masking and Power Analysis of AES](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F3-540-36400-5_16.pdf), CHES, 2002.

[38] S. Chari _et al._, [Towards sound approaches to counteract power-analysis attacks](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-48405-1_26.pdf), CRYPTO, 1999.

[39] L. Goubin, J. Patarin, [DES and Differential Power Analysis, the duplication method](http://www.goubin.fr/papers/dpafinal.pdf), CHES, 1999.

[40] J. Daemen, V. Rijmen, [Resistance Against Implementation Attacks A Comparative Study of the AES Proposals](https://www.esat.kuleuven.be/cosic/publications/article-362.ps), 1999.

[41] T. Popp, S. Mangard, [Masked dual-rail pre-charge logic: DPA-resistance without routing constraints](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/11545262_13.pdf), CHES, 2005.

[42] T. Messerges, [Using second-order power analysis to attack DPA resistant software](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-44499-8_19.pdf), CHES, 2000.

[43] E. Oswald _et al._, [Practical Second-order DPA Attacks for Masked Smart Card Implementations of Block Ciphers](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.89.4278&rep=rep1&type=pdf), CT-RSA, 2006.

[44] S. Tillich, C. Herbst, [Attacking State-of-the-Art Software Countermeasures-A Case Study for AES](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-85053-3_15.pdf), CHES, 2008.

[45] J.-J. Quisquater, D. Samyde, [ElectroMagnetic Analysis (EMA): Measures and CounterMeasures for Smart Cards](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F3-540-45418-7.pdf), Esmart, 2002.

[46] K. Gandolfi _et al._, [Electromagnetic Analysis: Concrete Results](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-44709-1_21.pdf), CHES, 2001.

[47] J. R. Rao, P. Rohatgi, [EMpowering Side-Channel Attacks](https://eprint.iacr.org/2001/037.pdf), 2001.

[48] E. Biham, A. Shamir, [Power Analysis of the Key Scheduling of the AES Candidates](http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/~biham/Reports/aes-power.ps.gz), 1999.

[49] P. C. Kocher, [Timing Attacks on Implementations of Diffie-Hellman, RSA, DSS, and Other Systems](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-68697-5_9.pdf), CRYPTO, 1996.

[50] W. Eck, [Electromagnetic Radiation from Video Display Units: An Eavesdropping Risk](https://cryptome.org/emr.pdf), 1985

[51] P. Wright, Spycatcher – The Candid Autobiography of a Senior Intelligence Officer, 1987.

[52] J. Kesley _et al._, [Side Channel Cryptanalysis of Product Ciphers](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/BFb0055858.pdf), ESORICS, 1998.

[53] D. Page, [Theoretical use of cache memory as a cryptanalytic side-channel](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.152.9987&rep=rep1&type=pdf), 2002.

[54] D. J. Bernstein, [Cache-timing attacks on AES](https://cr.yp.to/antiforgery/cachetiming-20050414.pdf), 2005.

[55] J. Waddle, D. Wagner, [Towards Efficient Second-Order Power Analysis](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-28632-5_1.pdf), CHES, 2004.

[56] M. Joye _et al._, [On Second-Order Differential Power Analysis](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/11545262_22.pdf), CHES, 2005.

[57] E. Prouff, M. Rivain, [Masking against side-channel attacks: A formal security proof](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-642-38348-9_9.pdf), EUROCRYPT, 2013.

[58] S. Micali, L. Reyzin, [Physically Observable Cryptography](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-24638-1_16.pdf), TCC, 2004.

[59] G. Crescenzo _et al._, [Perfectly Secure Password Protocols in the Bounded Retrieval Model](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/11681878_12.pdf), TCC, 2006.

[60] U. Maurer, [Conditionally-Perfect Secrecy and a Provably-Secure Randomized Cipher](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/BF00191321.pdf), Journal of Cryptology, 1992.

[61] S. Dziembowski, K. Pietrzak, [Leakage-resilient cryptography](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.215.1913&rep=rep1&type=pdf), FOCS, 2008.

[62] A. Duc _et al._, [Unifying leakage models: From probing attacks to noisy leakage](https://eprint.iacr.org/2014/079.pdf), EUROCRYPT, 2014.

[63] M. Rivain, E. Prouff, [Provably Secure Higher-Order Masking of AES](https://eprint.iacr.org/2010/441.pdf), CHES, 2010.

[64] J.-S. Coron _et al._, [Higher-Order Side Channel Security and Mask Refreshing](https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/359.pdf), FSE, 2013.

[65] K. Schramm, C. Paar, [Higher Order Masking of the AES](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.496.7125&rep=rep1&type=pdf), CT-RSA, 2006.

[66] M. Rivain _et al._, [Block Ciphers Implementations Provably Secure Against Second Order Side Channel Analysis](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-71039-4_8.pdf), FSE, 2008.

[67] L. Genelle _et al._, [Thwarting Higher-Order Side Channel Analysis with Additive and Multiplicative Maskings](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-642-23951-9_16.pdf), CHES, 2011.

[68] C. Carlet _et al._, [Higher-Order Masking Schemes for S-Boxes](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-642-34047-5_21.pdf), FSE, 2011.

[69] G. Barthe _et al._, [Strong Non-Interference and Type-Directed Higher-Order Masking](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2976749.2978427), ACM CCS, 2016.

[70] G. Barthe _et al._, [Parallel Implementations of Masking Schemes and the Bounded Moment Leakage Model](https://www.iacr.org/archive/eurocrypt2017/10210168/10210168.pdf), EUROCRYPT, 2017.

[71] S. Dhooghe, S. Nikova, [My Gadget Just Cares for Me - How NINA Can Prove Security Against Combined Attacks](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/615.pdf), CT-RSA, 2020.

[72] S. Belaïd _et al._, [Tight Private Circuits: Achieving Probing Security with the Least Refreshing](https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/439.pdf), ASIACRYPT, 2018.

[73] S. Tillich, J. Großschädl, [Power Analysis Resistant AES Implementation with Instruction Set Extensions](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-74735-2_21.pdf), CHES, 2007.

[74] A. G. Bayrak _et al._, [A First Step Towards Automatic Application of Power Analysis Countermeasures](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2024724.2024778), DAC, 2011.

[75] A. G. Bayrak _et al._, [An Architecture-Independent Instruction Shuffler to Protect against Side-Channel Attacks](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2086696.2086699), TACO, 2012.

[76] A. Miss _et al._, [Compiler assisted masking](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-642-33027-8_4.pdf), CHES, 2012.

[77] M. Barbosa _et al._, A domain-specific type system for cryptographic components, FSEN, 2011.

[78] G. Agosta _et al._, [A Code Morphing Methodology to Automate Power Analysis Countermeasures](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2228360.2228376), DAC, 2012.

[79] A. G. Bayrak _et al._, [Sleuth: Automated verification of software power analysis countermeasures](https://www.iacr.org/archive/ches2013/80860192/80860192.pdf), CHES, 2013.

[80] C. Lattne, V. Adve, [LLVM: A compilation framework for lifelong program analysis & transformation](http://wwwi10.lrr.in.tum.de/~gerndt/home/Teaching/HPCSeminar/llvm_lifelong_program_analysispdf.pdf), CGO, 2004.

[81] C. Cada _et al._, [KLEE: Unassisted and Automatic Generation of High-Coverage Tests for Complex Systems Programs](https://static.usenix.org/events/osdi08/tech/full_papers/cadar/cadar.pdf), OSDI, 2008.

[82] H. Eldib _et al._, [SMT-based verification of software countermeasures against side-channel attacks](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-642-54862-8_5.pdf), TACAS, 2014.

[83] H. Eldib, C. Wang, [Synthesis of Masking Countermeasures against Side Channel Attacks](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-319-08867-9_8.pdf), CAV, 2014.

[84] B. Dutertre, L. De Moura, [A fast linear-arithmetic solver for DPLL(T)](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/11817963_11.pdf), CAV, 2006.

[85] G. Barthe _et al._, [Verified Proofs of Higher-Order Masking](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-662-46800-5_18.pdf), EUROCRYPT, 2015.

[86] G. Barthe _et al._, [Formal Certification of Code-Based Cryptographic Proofs](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/1480881.1480894), POPL, 2009.

[87] G. Barthe _et al._, [Strong Non-Interference and Type-Directed Higher-Order Masking](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2976749.2978427), CCS, 2016.

[88] J.-S. Coron, [Formal Verification of Side-channel Countermeasures via Elementary Circuit Transformations](https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/879.pdf), ACNS, 2018.

[89] G. Agosta _et al._, [Compiler-based Side Channel Vulnerability Analysisand Optimized Countermeasures Application](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2463209.2488833), DAC, 2013.

[90] S. Belaïd _et al._, [Tornado: Automatic Generation of Probing-Secure MaskedBitsliced Implementations](https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/506.pdf), EUROCRYPT, 2020.

[91] J.S. Coron _et al._, [Side Channel Cryptanalysis of a Higher Order Masking Scheme](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-74735-2_3.pdf), CHES, 2007.

[92] A. Battistello _et al._, [Horizontal  side-channel attacks and countermeasures on the ISW masking scheme](http://158.64.76.181/bitstream/10993/34592/1/540.pdf), CHES, 2016.
